The Joe Rogan experience. Um.
What, what made you want to write this? Like w where'd this come from.
Actually two things, uh, about 10 years ago, 11 years ago,
I had this really weird experience. I was in San Francisco.
It's a lot of breath, work, yoga stuff going on there.
And I kept getting pneumonia. I surf a lot at,
at ocean beach and I thought that that was the reason.
So I kept getting bronchitis pneumonia year after year,
that just kept happening. So a doctor,
friend of mine suggested a breathing class might help.
I didn't know much about this, but went down,
signed up and was sitting in the corner of this studio,
cold room legs, crossed breathing in this rhythmic pattern,
nothing crazy just, and then really slow.
And I sweated through my t-shirt through my socks.
My hair was sopping, wet, sweat all over my face.
So I went back to her and I said, what happened? Like you're a doctor.
You should know this. And she said, oh, you must have had a fever.
Or the room must have been too hot. So she had no idea,
but I didn't know what to do with that story. So I just kind of filed it away.
Forgot about it for a number of years until I met some free divers.
These are people who have through the power of will enabled themselves to
hold their breath for 6, 7,
8 minutes at a time and dive to depths far below what any scientists thought
possible. So I thought, wow,
there's something in breathing here that I don't know about.
And I figured other people might not know about as well. Uh.
That's, that's, that's really interesting, you know, um,
I've known a bunch of free divers and, uh,
I've known a bunch of jiu-jitsu people that got really into yoga primarily
because of Hicks and Gracie and Gracie. Do you know he is famous, uh,
probably the most famous of the, of the,
like the classic jiu-jitsu people he's known as being the very best.
He was like one of the, uh, original,
real pioneers of jujitsu in America as well.
And there's this documentary on him called choke. Have you seen it? I have not.
No, it's really fascinating. This documentary,
he's doing all this crazy stomach breath stuff, the Yogi stuff, you know,
cause he's,
he's really into yoga as well for flexibility and balance and all those
different things. And he was, uh, probably the first guy to introduce yoga,
to jujitsu as well. But, um, him and his son,
who's also a world champion in jujitsu,
just stressed constantly that it's all about the breath and that breathing
is it's everything that it's everything for jujitsu,
it's everything for martial arts, it's everything for your mindset.
You're going to find that the foundation of so many different sports,
I think a lot of that has been forgotten.
I know that coaches in the fifties used to have their runners take a big
mouthful of water, run around the track,
and then they'd have to spit out that same amount of water into a cup to force
them to breathe through their nose, to force them,
to move their diaphragms up and down little more because breathing is so
essential to the recovery, their endurance and their performance.
One of the things I find interesting about your book was the experiment with
plugging up the nose for pro what'd. You guys do it for a month.
Is that what it was 10 days, 10 days. And that, that tender, I,
my nose was broken. Most of my life. I had a useless nose til I was 40.
And then I got an operation to have my deviated septum corrected and the
turbinates shaved down and then it changed my life. It really did. Like,
I didn't realize like what,
like the term mouth breather is a really interesting term, right?
Cause it's a term for a moron, but I felt like a moron. Um,
like after I got my nose fixed, I was like, why didn't I do this before?
Like I was robbing myself of oxygen.
Yeah.
And there's so much science supporting how injurious it is to constantly be
breathing through your mouth. There's there's no debate about that.
But what people don't realize is about 25 to 50% of the population habitually
breathe through their mouth.
And they don't realize that neurological problems that this causes the
respiratory problems, this causes problems with snoring, sleep apnea,
even metabolic disorders. I mean, it goes on and on and on.
So I had been talking to the chief of rhinology research at Stanford.
We had done many interviews over a series of months. He's a big nose guy.
So he said, this is the most amazing organ.
No one's talking about it at the NIH.
There's no school for studying the nose and its effects.
And he thought that that was criminal.
So he had warned me how bad mouth breathing was,
but no one knew how quickly that damage came on. So, uh, we,
we knew that after years it can change the structure of your face.
It's so common in kids that it has a term called adenoid face.
If you see these kids with very long faces,
because they've been mouth breathing so long that their faces have actually that
the musculature and the Skeletor teacher has.
Changed. It changes your skeleton. Yeah. Yeah.
It, it, it makes it creates a longer face. So, and that,
that also makes these people much more apt to snoring and sleep apnea. So, but,
but no one knew if, if a month of mouth breathing would be bad a year,
like how soon those, those issues came on. So I asked him, I said, well,
why don't, why don't you test it?
You're one of the best universities in the world. You have the means to do this.
And he thought, in his words,
it would be unethical because he knew how damaging that it could be for people.
And so I volunteered. I said, well, why don't you test it on me?
I'll get somebody else to do it. Uh, they had no money for this.
So we had to pay for this study, um, just to experience what,
what that was like. And, and the point wasn't due to do some like stunt,
it was to LOL ourselves a new position. My body certainly knew.
I think I was mouth breathing through much of my youth and that 25 to 50% of the
population knows. And to actually measure what happens.
Now,
do you think th there was some bacterial growth that was inside your nose as
well from this? Do you think that some of that could be attributed to just the,
the act of plugging the nose? Cause you physically plugged it.
It's not like you to breathe out of your mouth. You actually like,
see you closed up the opening.
Yeah. That's that's right. And it could, no one knows for sure,
because the less you use your nose,
the less you're going to be able to use your nose, just like any other muscle.
So when people start habitually breathing through their mouth,
their noses are going to start to close up.
And we know this from the doctor of speech, language pathology at Stanford,
she measured people who had laryngectomies holes drilled in their throat so they
could breathe. She found between two months and two years,
their noses were completely blocked. Zero air coming in.
So the more you use it, the more you're going to be able to use it.
So the less you use it, the more apt you will,
you will be to have problems with.
What is the process of, well, why does the nose close up?
It would seem that it's a whole, like that whole quote.
It's not in use this terminates, all those tissues, just, just start closing up.
Um.
And so using your nose actually makes the opening wider. Absolutely.
Really for you. Yeah, absolutely.
My nose got physically wider after my operation. It's really strange.
Like I was,
I looked back on the photos from when I was 40 on
my actual physical and I attributed it to the fact that they put these big foam
things and these plastic spacers in there because the doctor that did the
operation, he S for, I forget the period of time afterwards,
I had to have these things stuffed into my nose and this plastic that was sort
of sutured in place to hold it into position.
And I attributed that to why my nose got wider,
but I noticed it like within the year or two afterwards, I'm like,
my nose is wider. Like, it's different.
Like if I look at older pictures of myself,
my nose was more narrow and now it's more flared out. And I,
I felt like it was because of that. But now that you're saying this,
now I'm thinking maybe it's just from breathing out of.
It. Well, surgical interventions are going to open that airway.
There's no doubt about that,
but we know the more that you breathe through your nose,
the more that it's going to open up,
and you can see this with people who are habitual mouth breathers,
who are also joggers, who have just been breathing through their mouth for,
for decades. They start breathing through the nose at the beginning.
It's really, really.
Hard. And they say, I can't do this. This is awful. Then.
Weeks go by months, go by and their noses open up and,
and allows them to, to breathe through the nose and the benefits of that.
They're innumerable so many benefits of nasal breathing, not only oxygen,
but it helps defend your body humidifies air conditions, air on and on and on.
And this is something that I just don't think a lot of people realize. And,
and from the researchers I've been talking to, they were a bit frustrated too,
to seen so many chronic conditions tied to mouth breathing and how so
many of those could either be improved upon, or sometimes outright here,
but by switching the pathway in which you breathe. So.
Does breathing through your nose, make your actual nostril opening wider?
I don't know that I, and, and, uh, I haven't seen any papers on that.
So.
It's what my nostril holes and everything is probably just from the surgical
intervention and stuffing it with plastic and stretching it out.
And I would assume so. Yeah. Now.
What Wim Hoff will you referenced in the book? He doesn't give a about mouth,
about nose breathing or mouth breathing. He just goes, just breathe.
The breathe. Well, that's what he said. Oh.
Yeah. I practiced. I, his, his mode of breathing all the time.
I'm used to having, you know, his, his little voice in my head.
Doesn't he care about breathing out from the nose of the mouth.
He just wants you to be breathe.
Because if we're breathing 25,000 times a day,
if you're taking 500 of those breaths through your mouth,
it's not going to really make any impact on you.
I'm talking about habitual mouth breathing.
I'm just talking about through breathing.
Exercises. He's he's so what he's.
Done is he wants to make this easy and accessible for people.
So many people can't breathe through their noses. So they go,
they can't get that breath in those 30 huge breaths. Do you need to take right?
They take too long to do it. So he says, it doesn't matter. Don't pay attention.
You need to get that breath in. You need to expand your lungs.
And for the rest of the time, you know,
the benefits of nasal breathing that habitual breathing is, is so important.
It seems so strange to me reading your book, um,
that I'm just learning this in terms of like, I mean,
I've been doing athletics my whole life.
How do I not know that breathing through the nose is more beneficial?
How do coaches not know this?
Yeah, this is something I just got running up against over and over again.
And when I first started writing this book,
my friends who were journalists and authors, they said,
you write a book about breathing. Why would you write a book about breathing?
Yeah, there's, there's a good new book about walking.
Really? Um, so.
So they were ripping on me quite,
quite a bit until they heard some of the details of it. Um,
and the stuff is like, has been right in front of us the whole time.
And it's so obvious that no one's really paying attention to it.
And the scientific foundation, all the research is there.
And that's what makes these, these researchers, these scientists.
So frustrated is they, we have 50 years of rock,
solid science here showing the problems with mouth breathing,
showing the problems with snoring and sleep apnea.
No one's really been paying attention. We're,
we're treating all these separate problems that are associated with these core
issues. And we're not looking at the core issue.
And I think that breathing has to be considered along with diet and
exercise as, as a pillar of health. Because even if you eat keto, vegan, paleo,
whatever, even if you exercise all the time, if you're not breathing right,
you're never really going to be healthy. We know that beat the.
Truth. So air comes through your mouth. Air comes through your nose.
What is the difference between the air coming through your nose?
So your nose, if you were to take your fist, you've got a really big fist.
So if someone with a slightly smaller fist and to take that fist and imagine
just pushing it inside of your head,
that's about the volume of your nose and all of the sinus cavities.
So they even stretch up above your eyes.
So volume of your that's crazy.
It's about a billiard ball. Um, so, so a little less,
it depends on what size fish you have, right? So, so all,
and they call it the nasal concha because it looks exactly like a seashell.
If you were to split a seashell in, in half and look at it,
that's what's happening in your nose.
And all of this stuff evolved this way for a reason.
So that air that comes in through the nose is slowed down.
It's filtered it's humidified and it's condition.
So by the time it gets to your lungs,
your lungs can absorb that oxygen so much easier.
And that the nose is really the first line of defense.
Another amazing thing with a nose is it produces something called nitric
oxide, which is this wonderful molecule.
That is a vasodilators that plays in a central role in oxygen delivery,
and also helps battle off viruses and bacteria and other pathogens.
So this is all happening in the nose and slowing down that air.
And all of these other functions allow us to gain about 20% more oxygen
breathing through the nose than breathing through the mouth.
So you can breathe less and get more by breathing through the nose.
Wow. Um, so breathing through the mouth,
even though you're filling your lungs up, even though you're,
you're taking a big, deep breath, you're filling your lungs up.
You're not getting as much oxygen.
That's right? Because you can over breathe. When, when people, uh,
at a gym or when people are jogging, you see them
really going to get the maximum amount of oxygen. And that's not what happened,
what is happening to your body.
So you are offloading the CO2 by offloading too much CO2
you're causing constriction in your circulation. So right now,
if we were to breathe 30 huge breaths, you'll feel some tingling in your head.
You'll feel some, maybe your fingertips will get cool.
Your toes will get too cool. That's not from an increase of oxygen.
It's the opposite. That's happening. That's from a decrease of circulation.
So your body wants to be imbalanced.
You want to have the right amount of CO2 and oxygen for optimum delivery.
And that's what the nose helps you to do.
That was one of the craziest things about the book where you're talking about
yogis, that we're able to vary the temperature between each hand. No,
on the same hand. Oh, in the same house.
Same hand, one area was gray. The other was red. Oh,
in the same,
not even this God on the same hand.
And you know, when I came across this, people are saying, this is impossible.
There's you know, who did this study? Some guy in, in towels in his garage.
It was, no, it was at the manager clinic.
Which was the world's, uh,
at least in the U S the largest psychiatric research facility at the time.
And, uh, Navy physicists did these tests.
It was reporting in the New York time and replicated.
They haven't found someone who had the powers of Swami, Rama. They found,
I think, whims about as close as we've gotten to that guy.